good evening everyone
I'm Ron Vale the executive director of
Genelia research campus and I'd like to
welcome everyone to a very special
evening with our honored guest
Siddhartha Mukherjee and I'd like to
also extend uh special warm greetings to
um friends from our local Louden County
Community many of whom are here in
person uh but this event was so popular
it sold out so we've also made this
event uh accessible online uh through
the Loudoun County Public Library so I
want to thank them as well
uh so welcome genelians and welcome
Loudon County and I hope that you will
enjoy this uh special dialogues event
this evening
so I'm going to keep my opening remarks
uh fairly short because we're going to
cover Sid's background and his work
during our conversation but in brief
most of you know of Sid Mukherjee uh as
being
one of the finest
non-fiction authors in science and
medicine I would say of our time
so Sid uh kind of burst onto the scene
in
2010 uh with his non-fiction book
um the Emperor of all maladies which is
a fascinating historical and personal
perspective of cancer as a as a disease
and for this work Sid uh was awarded the
2011 Pulitzer Prize for a general
non-fiction
Sid's second book uh the gene an
intimate history also made it to number
one on the New York Times bestseller
list
uh and Ken Burns produced two PBS
documentaries on uh these works one on
the Emperor of all maladies and the
second documentary on the gene
and then Sid's latest book the song of
the cell which many of you have received
uh tonight was released last fall
um and we'll talk about that in our
conversation
and Sid has also written numerous essays
and opinion pieces for the New York
Times and also the New Yorker
but being an author is Sid's night job
uh Sid's primary job is as a physician
scientist at Columbia University where
he's an oncologist taking care of
patients with cancer
and his Devotion to helping patients is
also the driving force behind SIDS also
very influential work as a scientist so
it is a very active and exciting
research program that includes
genetically engineering immune cells to
treat cancer and also engineering stem
cells for the purpose of treating
osteoarthritis
which brings me uh to yet another hat
that SIDS Sid wears as an entrepreneur
with the purpose of advancing his ideas
uh to the clinic said it has founded at
least three companies that I'm aware of
uh instead I have co-founded one of
these companies together and uh it's
really been a great pleasure working
with Sid in that capacity
but in addition uh to all his
professional work
Sid also has a very busy uh family life
um he uh is married uh his wife Sarah is
an accomplished artist and they have uh
two daughters
and there's a New York Times article
devoted just to what Sid does with his
family on a typical Sunday uh which is
called how Dr Siddhartha murpaji cancer
expert Spends His Sundays which actually
I encourage you to read because I think
it really illustrates how much Sid can
manage to do so thoughtfully in a single
day
uh so indeed to me uh Sid seems to be
the Emperor of time and priorities
um and we are all the beneficiaries of
his time and his priorities because
through his work Sid sends so many
positive ripples uh throughout the world
so uh Sid it is a great honor to have
you uh at genelian thank you for coming
thank you for spending uh the day and
the evening with us and Ladies and
Gentlemen let's welcome Sid Mukherjee
thank you
thank you so much
write all your books here okay well
it's a door stopper
um so uh anyway Sid thank you again
yeah well this is also a great
opportunity uh for me
um to ask some questions that I've
actually been curious about for a long
time but never felt like I could really
ask you in a professional setting so
um uh I think this will be a fun
conversation and just as a as a
framework for this dialogue and kind of
a road map both for you and the audience
I thought we'd uh cover a little bit
about your you know personal history
your background your path to science and
medicine and then of course everyone's
curious about uh how he became an author
and how you work as an author and um
I also do want to say to uh the audience
that uh
um we have a new research program at
Genelia called 40 cellular physiology
uh which is very much in the spirit of
this book so uh those at Genelia and
actually others from the community I
really encourage you to read it because
it's a beautiful history of the of ideas
in cell biology and also
um the amazing future ahead of uh cell
biology as a discipline and for the
future of medicine so
um uh it's really kind of foundational
actually for the work we're doing right
now at Genelia
um and then maybe we'll cover your own
science and your work particularly as it
relates to cell therapy
and then uh finally a topic I think that
you and I are both interested in uh and
everyone uh many people are which is
um you know how we hold a conversation
with the public about science
particularly during these times when
um
it's so important to convey what what
science is to understand science and uh
and hopefully kind of reverse the
current epic of mistrust and science uh
that we're seeing so
um so anyway why don't we get started
um
so you know I started the last
conversation with our previous guest who
is Freeman robowski
um
by asking him about his grandmothers
okay as kind of a route into uh his
personal history and
um I thought that would be a good entry
point for this conversation too yes
because I will uh fill out my first
footnote here from the gene
and um
uh this book the gene uh is dedicated uh
to uh your grandmother uh
um priyabala Mukherjee
and you said I owe a debt to my
grandmother
uh she weathered the buffets of history
with resilience but she weathered the
buffets of heredity with something more
than resilience the grace that we and
her descendants can only hope to emulate
it is to her that this book is dedicated
so I maybe you can tell us about
your grandmother the kind of historical
times in which she lived and why she was
influential to you in your life
um so first of all thank you Ron
um thank you for everyone for joining up
um
uh my grandmother uh on my father's side
was
um was a complicated character
um
uh We've
um uh we've heard the term tiger mom she
was a sort of tiger Grandmom
um but for very very important reasons
so
um the uh much like
um uh the War uh in the United States
um the definitional event in the history
of India's partition
um so that happened in 1947
um and as you know the country which
stretched across what is now Pakistan
India and Bangladesh was all under one
territory was then at the 1947 split
into two territories
what was then called Pakistan and East
Pakistan bizarrely enough connected by
no land mass but governed under the same
government
an idea that's
completely mad
um and then Indian India in the middle
um my grandmother's family
um or my family comes from East Pakistan
Bangladesh which and then they moved
um in my grandmother's case just a few
weeks before partition into Calcutta
which is where she grew up where she
brought her children my father was
around 14 at that time and he had
um for Elder Brothers
um
um that's when
um things begin to fall apart but also
our our formational in the history of my
family
um so as many people have known in my
books um my books are are simultaneously
um I would say very uh broad histories
of science
but also very uh
deep personal histories and I don't make
a distinction between one and the other
they you when you read a book my books
you weave between one and the other and
you you know it's like moving from one
room to another room
so this book the gene is about heredity
and the particular heredity personal
heredity that I have in this book is of
mental illness
um uh in particular of bipolar disease
and schizophrenia so
um my of my father's originally five
brothers
um one of them
um
uh now in Calcutta post-partition
um unfortunately dies of
um
a kind of bipolar diaphysis we now
recognize as a very manic syndrome
another one
is not diagnosed with but because we
didn't have the words for it
um has schizophrenia
um that's in the first generation and
then
um
my grandmother
takes this second
um the schizophrenic Sun sort of under
her Wing
um and comes to live with us in in Delhi
after my father moves to Delhi so we are
in a family in India we're in a nuclear
family of course everyone lives together
she lives with my uncle with
schizophrenia
and then
the the in the heredity pattern of
disease becomes even more apparent when
a cousin from another one of the
father's children also is now diagnosed
with schizophrenia now we have the
vocabulary for it and as there is
institutionalized He Still Remains
institutionalized
um and then in the third generation
there's another
two people with uh with bipolar disease
uh or some version of bipolar disease um
one of them being me
um so
um
and uh
my grandmother
to some extent watches all of this
happen the
but I would call the diaphysis of not
just partition and its consequences but
of mental illness and its consequences
and she
um
becomes in her life a kind of
Fierce Protectors of my
um very ill Uncle who lives with us
um and then
ill to very ill
cousin
who also initially you know lives with
us for a little bit but ultimately is
institutionalized and it's not until I
grow up and become a physician myself
that I sort of realize the kind of
um
in temperate Grace
um that it required that is required to
do that
um you need to become a doctor to
understand the the simultaneous
intemperance and also the the dignity
and Grace that you have to give
to people who are unwell
um
and so that's the uh that's why this
book is dedicated to my grandmother
lovely
so how did this um influence you so
you're growing up in this
um household environment
um did this have any influence on like
your path to medicine or you know I
again I a lot of this I didn't think
about and it's important we can come
back to this idea a lot of this I didn't
think about until I was writing a book
because these are thoughts that get
buried inside you bury inside your
Consciousness you don't really think
about them
and then you say to yourself oh gosh you
know while you're writing a book you
save yourself oh my God this is sort of
my origin story
that that I'm writing and and you know I
was talking to some some of the postdocs
and and group leaders here and a lot of
questions was you know how much what the
process of thinking of writing a book is
and it's very much for me like like you
know as I'm writing I'm kind of
realizing things that I didn't
understand before and that's true for
science of course as well
um but it's also true for personal
history
um and so I was writing the Gene and um
it actually Sarah my wife reminded me
she said you know you understand
why you know she was reading a draft of
the books he said and this is in 2016
I've been a doctor now for you know
God 16 20 years and she said you realize
why you became a doctor
and I said oh gosh I suppose I do
because
writing about
um illness and Grace and dignity that
comes with protecting protecting the ill
and and so yes so the answer is of
course it does but but it was sort of
buried somewhere in in my unconscious
until it came out in this book
yeah I may come back to your upbringing
but
um just following that thread for a
moment
um
yearbooks are very personal which makes
them uh both accessible and um
you know this is a combination of
emotion
along with you know the real science
that that makes them uh very impactful
but
um
you share a lot of uh stories of
patience so beautifully right from the
get-go when you open up the first
chapter
but as you said you also share a lot
about yourself
um in an amazingly honest and I would
say almost vulnerable way it's called
over sharing it's maybe over sharing but
um
just following up what you said is I I
mean maybe for me that would be very
hard but you know when you think about
what drives you to write what gets you
up with the passion to put down words on
the page
is that part of your motivation when you
became a writer that you did have your
own story to tell and that was kind of
an intentional part yeah I think most
people who write uh and look at these
most people write well
um
uh when you ask them why they've written
a book or
um why they did something this is
probably true for scientists too that's
just something that scientists share
um would give you an answer that goes
along the lines up and there are many
variants of this but it goes along the
lines of well what else could I do
um
uh there's really it's not as if this
there's a you know you have a set of
options uh and you decide to not write
um mostly you're writing and and again
to some extent you're doing science
because that's the only thing you know
how to do
um I mean otherwise we become Bankers or
something
um
uh but I think that's part of the drive
part of the drive is is letting it out
um and letting the stories out
um
I have a wonderful story here because
um I I heard a joke in medical school
um about a medical student who
I just saw a patient in the in the
emergency room
um with back pain
um and he said uh so he was a you know
he was the first three medical student
and he said he went up with the guy with
back pain and he said oh my gosh you've
got pancreatic cancer
um and so the guy went through an MRI
and a CAT scan and turned out he had
pancreatic cancer
um so uh at the end of the year the
medical student gets the first prize in
the medical school for diagnosing
pancreatic cancer
um and he goes up and the professor of
medicine comes up and says uh well that
was amazing I mean you know
um how did you diagnose
um you know pancreatic cancer and this
person with back pain and the medical
student goes up and says well what other
causes of back pain are there
um not also the most wonderful way of
sharing the news with the patient either
so anyway so it's a little bit like it's
a little bit like that you know you know
what what else could I do but you're
right right
uh about uh well before we go on to the
next thing I I think you could have
written also a wonderful book on these
stories of patience which would also
bring you know this to life yeah but you
added this you know extra layer on on
your own life uh that is yeah and to be
honest I mean you know in the
traditional rhyme we can speak a little
bit about writing and the tradition of
writing
um I sort of fused uh unconsciously
fused many things together so I fused
um a strand of writing which is which
continues from sort of the Victorian
case history to Oliver Sacks
um
uh who was by the way uh notoriously
private
it's not until a very late book of his
that we actually learn anything exactly
about all of our sacks we actually don't
know I knew all over myself at Columbia
but we don't know anything about all our
sets although he tells you everything
about patience
um so there's that there's that strand
um then there's a second strand which I
would say you know again a Big Rich
history
um starting from uh you know people like
Lewis Thomas and others who've written
about science in an accessible way
and then there's a third strand of
writing Memoir
um and there are many people who write
Memoirs Physicians who write written
Memoirs
um Sharon Newlin comes to mind and and
others who've written Memoirs which have
patient stories in them
um and I thought well why don't we put
everything into one big pot and boil it
um and would you do so well which is
which is how these books came about here
yeah well we'll come back to the books
in a second but let's uh let's go back
to Delhi for a moment yeah
um your your father was an executive at
Mitsubishi your mom was a school teacher
um you know we've heard your family
moved from a partition to Kolkata to
Delhi so how is it in that background
that you somehow kindled an interest in
in science or medicine well
um you know so I I sort of naturally
gravitated towards it I was interested
in in science I was interested in
medicine right from medicine came later
I think I was interested in science I
was uh you know I had good teachers I
had great teachers great particularly
good
um biology teacher um technically I
think they're extremely influential
um
as um uh you know just um along with our
common friend Tara varmus
um just did a kind of a pro bono event
for uh the New York uh Science
Foundation which runs a a free program
for children
um in the Queens
um flushing area and the reason I did it
I mean they just wrote me out of the
blue the reason I did it was because I I
think that that those influences as
children are extraordinarily critical
um and for me it was a good teacher
um
um and there are a lot of teachers or
some teachers here in the audience too
so well thank you for your work because
I mean it really makes a huge difference
especially for someone in their
formative years if you have a bad
teacher you know what happens uh but if
you're a good teacher you also know what
happened so so I I became more and more
interested in science I you know was
interested in I would say when I by the
time I went to college I was interested
in all the Sciences I had a hard time
figuring out sort of what science I was
interested in I was not interested in I
also happen to have
um and I haven't written about this I'm
actually writing a piece about her I
happen to have a very good English
teacher
um who in the middle of her teaching
career while she was teaching me was
diagnosed with breast cancer and died of
breast cancer
um uh and this was the time this was
1980s where in India where you know you
had surgical options but nothing very
much beyond that this was you know
um herceptin had not even entered sort
of it was around in the United States
but not around in India so
um so I so I had you know two very
strong
teachers two very strong Traditions as
it were very good
um mathematics and and biology and then
English as well so
I think those are very formative in
terms of my decisions and then what
about your decision to come to the U.S
was there uh how did that come about was
there another path where you could have
stayed in there were many pots and in
fact it was very uncommon when I came I
came to the United States in 1989
um there were four undergraduates at
Stanford Stanford there were four
undergraduates from India at Stanford
um that year that number has now swelled
to
50 70 80. I have no idea what the
numbers look like but there were four
this was a time when
um
you know India was a was a um kind of a
Soviet model social estate uh this was
pre-liberalization so in order to get
U.S currency you know my father had to
stand in line and fill out a form and
triplicate
um
um and request a bureaucrat for a
thousand dollars
um and then pay them and that's that's
the maximum you could get
um in terms of how much you could get
out of the country
um so uh it was
um it was uh it was it was very uncommon
um and the only other thing I can tell
you is that um I was admitted so I I
applied um I wrote all my applications
by hand I know this because my daughter
just got into college and she's going to
college next year but
um I was remarking on the difference I
wrote all my applications by hand mailed
them myself in uh you know old mailing
slips uh everything was done by hand
there was no email
um so I went to the I used to go to what
was then the U.S Council which was a you
know one of these uh buildings that the
US Embassy figure out how to apply for
what colleges
um I had been to the United States
before and traveled before I was very
inspired by
um by uh by the sort of liberal arts
education system here
um and had been to Berkeley in
particular my cousins had gone to
Berkeley UC Berkeley
um where Jennifer are a common friend is
a professor
I was very inspired by UC Berkeley UC
Berkeley was a state school so it didn't
have any real mechanism for someone like
me to sort of be in at UC Berkeley so I
said well I'll apply to the nearest
college which must be similar uh called
Stanford
um
China they were not similar at all
um uh and I got in and I also got into
uh Harvard and I this is not a joke my
English teacher cried
real tears when I told her that I was
going to go to Stanford over
um Harvard University and she said no
one has ever from India has ever turned
down and Harvard
he University had started crying and I
said it's got to be a first so well you
started a trend yeah
um well speaking of uh Stanford and also
mutual friends uh Paul Berg yes so um uh
paulberg is
um won a Nobel Prize for recombinant DNA
and uh remarkable person
um I was also at Stanford for
um in the MD PhD program and Paul was
certainly one of my like favorite yes
teachers role models and you worked in
his lab
so I was wondering if you could describe
like
how did that influence your yeah your
path and
um
it's a strange thing you know you you as
you grow older of course many of these
people vanish physically
but um they don't vanish from you from
you mentally the public died
three four months ago
it was a very very important very
influential character in my life he's of
course very much in the gene very much
in the discussions around the book on
the cell and unfortunately passed away
um I
um I was an undergraduate
when I approached Paul I think I may
have been the first undergraduate to
work in his laboratory
um it may have been one of the only one
of two undergraduates to ever work in
this Laboratory
um I learned about Paul because I I had
become by that time as an undergraduate
my second year become very intrigued and
interested not only in
his scientific work on the common Indian
people who don't know what the common in
DNA is Paul was the first person to
um propose and then
stitch together two pieces of DNA from
completely different organisms
because the genetic code is universal
um Paul suggested and thought through
the idea and because DNA is a chemical
ultimately he thought through the ideas
of asking well what if we took the DNA
from the bacteria in a virus or
eventually a DNA from a bacteria and a
human cell
and cut them and paste them together to
form a single molecule of DNA which was
contiguous
now of course now we think that that's
completely normal
um but in the time that Paul was doing
this in the late 1970s early 80s it's
considered extraordinarily radical
because all of a sudden you could do
molecular cloning you could take a piece
of DNA from a virus and a piece of DNA
from a bacteria and a piece of DNA from
a horse and put them all together into
one continuous piece of DNA and if you
put that into a cell the cell would
think that it was one part of the same
um uh genetic code and that's how you
could make for instance insulin
um in a yeast cell or a bacterial cell
or a mammalian cell or you could make a
new protein out of anything so so that
was what Paul's scientific discovery
um was along with some other other
people he's not the only person but Paul
also did something that was very that
was equally important and equally
influential in my life which is that
once he had made that Discovery
um he organized a series of conferences
um the most important one being the
azilamar Conference
held in the silamar in which uh
scientists led by Paul themselves put a
moratorium on this work before the
ethical and biosafety implications of
this kind of work could be figured out
and uh the Asylum are conference it was
actually a system R2
um was a landmark event because it was
an event that was will come back to it
because in every event that was not only
attended by scientists but also attended
by lawyers by ethicists by journalists
by the broad public in order to create a
consensus or a a view about what should
be done while this new technology which
was obviously revolutionary it obviously
could be used in
um
revolutionary manners could be managed
by the community of scientists
communicated to the broader public and
and scientists would get feedback about
how it could be best managed
um as we moved along to the Future Paul
had done both of these so the idea of
him wearing two hats or multiple hats
um was very intriguing to me
um and they of course have to do with
the books because the books also wear
multiple hacks so I went up to Paul as
an undergraduate
knocking on a door
um knocked on his door and said Paul I'd
love to work with you
um and miraculously he said yes and then
I was like oh my God to work in Paul
voice lab so anyway
and then we became friends we've been
friends for life and
um but I would go to Stanford I'd have
dinner with them and talk and there's a
lot of
um talk with all talk about Paul in all
of the books right after the third book
and
um
uh sadly
um and I when I'd give scientific
seminars at Stanford which I would do
now as first a student and a graduate
student than a
poster and finally an independent
investigator
um I'd see Paul on sort of the front of
the audience and uh asking questions and
then have dinner with them afterwards
and really talk through what I was
thinking about and and how things were
going and then the last time I went
actually was this somewhat sad story the
last time I went
um
uh
uh we were supposed to have dinner and
he canceled because he was not feeling
well
um and that's the last I saw him saw him
um so that's sad the one thing I will
say is that he lost a bet
uh so um to me okay yes
um so every time our tradition was that
every time we have dinner we'd have a
bet
and the loser would pay for dinner
um
and the last time uh the bet the BET was
actually loaded against me I could tell
you what the BET was so the vet was I
said that Jennifer doudna and another
sharpenter would win the Nobel Prize in
either physiology medicine or chemistry
but they would be the only two people
they would be the only two and of course
it's historic because it was the first
time there was Nobel Prize was awarded
to two women by themselves
um Mercury won their Nobel Prize twice
by herself but this was the first time
that it was awarded two women by
themselves Paul said that would be a
third person whoever it was he said I'm
not going to tell you this third person
is but I bet it would be it would be a
three-way split because you're allowed
it's been three ways now the odds were
loaded against me because of course you
know three is easier than than two but I
won uh that bet so somewhere he owes me
a dinner
and what was the lifetime score was Paul
ahead uh no we were sort of 50 50. yeah
okay
um and the the BET was so it was it was
very he was very formal about it and
that was made it fun he would say a bed
is not a bet until it's it's formalized
and written so he would write me an
email
uh when I would go back to uh New York
and I get an email in my inbox saying
the the terms of the BET are the I mean
I was a formal email from Hallberg they
would say that the terms of the BET are
the following you have you know said
you've stated that X and I have stated
why wouldn't it be your next book that's
with Paul exactly it's like you know my
conversations with Mori uh uh or
whatever that book is called um
um I'll I'll spare you all the other
details but but somewhere he owes me a
dinner so I'm gonna go collect
well um speaking of uh
wearing multiple hats
um and maybe getting to your progression
in your career learning to where the
many hats that you do you uh graduated
you got your PhD and then got your md
and um here you are as a resident and
fellow
um and then you start thinking about
this other
um
urge which is to get into writing so I
maybe always even start with what you
wrote
um the project evidently vast began as a
more modest Enterprise in the summer of
2003 having completed a residency in
medicine uh in graduating cancer
Immunology I began training in cancer
medicine at the Dana-Farber Institute
cancer center and Mass General Hospital
in Boston
I had initially envisioned writing a
journal of that year A View From The
Trenches of cancer treatment but that
Quest soon grew into a larger
exploratory Journey that carried me in
the depths not only the science and
medicine but of culture History
Literature and politics into cancers
past and into its future
so
um I'd like you to explain that Journey
a little bit but I do want to explain to
the audience one thing
that
when you're a resident and a fellow it
is probably the most demanding time that
people can remember in their lives it's
like hard to find the time to make
dinner or do your laundry
and both of which I didn't do by the way
that's how you got all of your time well
anyway the the message of this this
whole evening is don't do your laundry
works for me
um but
yeah tell us about that journey I mean
how did you uh go from well let's do a
journal to
um the depth of this exploration and
maybe the Turning Point well maybe this
is there's a book here
uh so so the journal became bigger and
bigger um so that you know journaling is
something that I do I encourage people
to do I think it's a very meditative
practice it's a kind of way to think
through ideas
um uh so I started one uh when I was uh
not a resident right to be totally
honest you cannot do anything when
you're a resident I mean I was so
physically exhausted
um now the now their laws about
um uh residency they weren't when I
started and um I should tell you a
little bit about Mass General
um
uh Mass General in particular was uh
very memorable the culture of Mass
General was the hospital would empty out
at night and if you were the resident on
call
um the entire medicine service was yours
you ran the medicine service
um you being the first day intern
um and uh and it was uh a master was
very special it had a what was called a
two plus one system which is you had two
days off and one day on call so every
third night you'd be on for the entire
night then you'd be on for the entire
day the following
until you went home
um and went to sleep then you'd come
back the next morning for the the one
and then you were on call again so
um I didn't do anything then except for
occasionally doing my laundry but
um
um uh in fact there's a moment where
where I I you know I had lived in the
house and there's a moment where
um the uh the superintendent of where I
lived came and said
um he saw some he's looking at my look
at my sink
and he said out of pity I'll do your
dishes
for you
um but anyway so resident but Fellowship
was very different Fellowship was a very
emotionally very different too because
uh EUC cancer patient after cancer
patients
um day in day out
um and the and that's when I did a lot
of the journal and then the Turning
Point really was
um realizing when I talked to patients
realizing that there was no road map
so here we were dealing with it with a
disease where you know you'd find
something about cancer in the front
pages of the New York Times every day
and yet when you ask patients about
their Journeys
and what they were looking for there was
no history there was no road map and it
was a complete uh kind of bizarrely
shocking so here is something again
commonplace experience I mean everyone
that you know I'm sure in this audience
knows someone with cancer and there was
no book and of course without having Ken
Burns make the documentary no film about
the history of this thing that was in
the newspaper every day I mean imagine
if this was true for any other aspect of
common human life that you would not
find a book about it
um so can I maybe
just follow up on that I mean maybe you
can also explain the impact of this book
and I don't mean in terms of winning
Awards or honors or all that but the
impact that you've seen this book carry
to individuals with with cancer yeah
it's been incredible I mean you know
uh the the I don't think there's a day
that goes by without someone from some
part of the world writing to me
um blindly
um saying thank you for the book uh
or you know
thank you for you know my mother had it
well she was I didn't not my mother but
the person writing their mother you you
found it useful when they had breast
cancer being stopped on the street and
say you know someone's recognizing and
saying thank you for
for writing the book it made my journey
easier I could so it's
um its impact was
beyond that Beyond certainly beyond what
I had imagined or expected
um it's just
um it resonates I'm I should tell you
I'm writing an update now because I
thought I'd do it in 10 in 10 years
after but it's going to be the 15th year
um after the books the book came out in
2010 the updated version will come out
in 2014 or 15 depending on when I can
actually finish it but 15 years have
lost I think we need to know what's
happened
um and how it's changed so
um but that said it's been you know
important in so many ways and then
um I guess my own realization of all of
this was when my my agents who's been
incredibly important
literary influence in my life and been
very important in sort of getting these
books together Sarah talked want
um the um
I'll tell you two incidents
um one is uh uh Sarah called me up about
two months after the book was published
the first run of this book by the way
was 5 000 copies
um it sold more than several million but
um and so they printed 5000 copies and
then
um my agent called up my publisher and
said
5000 is not going to cut it
um and so my publicist my publisher
who's also great literary influence I
mean Nan Graham great publisher said
well what do you think we should start
with and my uh Sarah my agent uh
absolutely shamelessly said she said um
and I remember the word I was on the
phone uh on a phone call with them
um and she said
um Nan
Emperor is of the book yeah she said
Emperor is a phenomenon
um I want you to publish a hundred
thousand copies of this book
um first book by an unknown writer
um and Nan said well we'll we'll set it
for 50.
um so that was the first run of of the
emperor so I don't know if you have a
first edition we should send you one but
yeah please send me one yes I know
um
I was going to ask you about what you're
doing next but I think you already
answered that question but
um why don't we go to this recent book
um
because that will also get into some of
your science too but
um
it's a song of the cell and uh it says
an exploration of medicine and the new
human so that's a very provocative title
uh but speaking of the treatment of
cancer
maybe you could just take the audience
on a little journey of where cancer
treatment was
um and also a little bit about where you
see it going uh with with cell with cell
therapy and what the difference is
between these kinds of treatments
um and what what is exciting to you
about cell engineering as a future for
cancer treatment yes I mean the pillars
of Cancer Treatments traditionally have
been uh obviously surgery radiation
um and then since the 1950s chemical
therapies chemotherapy
um
then since the
1990s a new class of medicines called
targeted therapies so these are also
chemotherapies but rather than killing
cells in discriminately
a new class of medicines that are more
discriminate in their killing of cells
there's a Continuum between one and the
other but
um so targeted Therapies
um and now moving on to
um to new
two or three new classes of of therapies
um and that's what's gonna be at least
part of this new uh new updated version
um the first is many of you would
recognize immunological therapies so
immune therapies
um and
um it's been long recognized that
cancers
um can be treated by the your own immune
system
in various ways
um there was a long tradition
um somewhat misplaced in the 1900s of
injecting toxins uh which would activate
your immune system and there were some
responses to cancer and since then we've
learned that in fact you can use your
immune system particularly T cells to
kill cancer cells
um
so that's
um one area
the second which is also something that
our lab or my lab along with Lou Cantley
and others have have worked on is
becoming a therapy is to use diet
um so we think of diet as uh completely
ancillary
um in cancer Therapeutics we are slowly
realizing that it's actually potentially
an independent arm that one can
manipulate just like one can manipulate
um other kinds of therapy including
chemotherapy
um and so that's led to a whole series
of Investigations about the possibility
of using a diet to modulate responses to
cancer cells you can go into that in
Greater detail but the one that you're
curious about is cellular therapy
cellular engineering
um so
um
several people realized along with me
that you can engineer cells particularly
immune cells and stem cells
um and potentially combinations of
immune cells and stem cells to treat
cancers
um you can take an in an immune cell out
of the out of out of the body a T cell
for instance and using genetic
engineering you can weaponize that T
Cell to kill cancer cells you can take
myeloid cells another ring of the immune
system out of the body weaponize it to
kill cancer cells
um and so and you can combine it with
stem cell therapies
um in various clever ways so that you
can now attack cancers so that would be
cellular therapy and I would say my
laboratory spends most of its time on
this third wing although we have a deep
interest in dietary Therapies but it's
most of the time on these cellular
therapies using genetically modified
immune cells of different kinds to
direct them against cancer
yeah so you um when you read this book
one of the entry points is um
uh a young girl Emily who was uh the
first person that was treated with this
weaponized first child the child from
somebody else
um
and uh
you know remarkable response
um alive and well and cured today
um yeah she was three when she was seven
she's 18 now yeah
um
well one of the challenges with this uh
what's called car T therapy which is
this weaponized therapy is that
um first of all it's expensive
it's largely a therapy I would say in
the first world and
um
I'd like to hear a little bit about your
effort to kind of democratize like
Leading Edge medicine around the world
so uh particularly uh you recently
co-founded a company called immuneal
which is an interesting name maybe you
could tell the audience about that sure
but um it's uh a company in India to try
to bring this new exciting car T therapy
um to the Indian population so and you
use the word which I think is a really
interesting word uh Venture philanthropy
so maybe you could just describe a
little about your motivation uh what
this company is doing and uh where it is
right now
sure um so uh
uh you know most of my projects uh like
writing 500 pages books books on cancer
um start as somewhat mad dreams
um
and uh the matter the better in some
ways um so I was sitting next to this
the all true stories I was sitting next
to
um India's uh probably India's most
successful bio uh biologic manufacturer
kirinshaw
um who started off as basically in
Brewery because she couldn't get a job
um she came back trained as in Brewing
yeast Brewing couldn't get a job and she
said and they said there's no job for a
woman in East Brewing so she said well
if you can Brew yeast I can make yeast
make proteins and she founded biocon one
of the most successful uh the single
most successful actually Indian
biotechnology company
um uh so I was sitting at dinner next to
Kiran uh about four years ago just
before the pandemic and I said Karen you
know
um we've got 1.3 billion people in in
the country this we were sitting in
Boston
I said okay we've got 1.3 billion people
in the country they're about six
countries that have T-cell therapies car
key therapies why can't we make them in
India
and she said um and I said in particular
I said you know you woke up and one
morning not literally woke up at morning
and decided to make uh biologics like
herceptin in India why can't we make T
Cell therapies we can send Rockets to
the Moon
should be able to make T Cell therapies
and she said you're right we should be
able to make physical therapies and so
why don't we just do that
um so I said fine if you're up for it
I'm up for it um so that's how we found
how we found it immune immunil is uh
named after immune and Neil Neil means
Indigo and indigo of course was the
basis of the name India
um so we called the company immuneal and
um
uh and then we
said well we've got to raise some money
to do this
um and so that's when this idea of
venture philanthropy came about which is
that we approached people and said
listen this is not going to be a you
know this is not going to be Facebook
um and
um it's not gonna be Google
um we will make you money
but it's not going to be like
500 times your money but on the other
hand you'll get the satisfaction I hope
of bringing a completely new therapy and
saving the life of a child with relapsed
uh leukemia who would otherwise be dead
um and
to be honest and just some my surprise
and desiredly people said Yes actually
you know that's a nice thing to do
um
um we'll we'll put in your the seed
money to do this
so anyway that's how I mean you got
funded and started I put my contribution
in kind because I took some of the
licenses that I had created in my
laboratory and you know that we've been
uh fortunate enough to make some
discoveries and I said I'll put my those
licenses into the company so I licensed
out
um some of the
molecules therapies that we were
developing in the lab
um and that's how Emilio got started
um
and uh
uh we started off in Bangalore uh which
is the tech Hub of India
um and it's it's an astonishing story
then kovid hits
um and we created a covet bubble
um because we wanted to finish this
facility now if you imagine this a
little bit this is a facility where
um
it's you have to wear a hazmat suit to
get in because one contaminated
test tube or one contaminated
um tissue culture means that the patient
won't get their T cells uh means that
that the kid will die the child will die
so the stakes are enormous and it's an
incredible thing that that through covid
these
um these men and women who put the
facility together basically really lived
in a bubble didn't visit their families
lived in the bubble until the facility
was completed it was inspected by the
Indian FDA cleared by the Indian FDA
those
one night when a pipe exploded I
remember staying up all night and trying
to figure out what to do but thankfully
it was contained and so forth but uh so
um it was completed and uh we've just
finished our 24 patient study yeah which
is uh extremely extremely positive
extremely fast under incredible
circumstances and
um
you know in India and really making a
difference in people's lives there uh so
I I find it an incredibly inspiring like
story of what's possible but let me get
um because I want to get to the last
topic and then open up questions to the
audience uh and you know this gets to
explaining signs to the public uh you
are really at the front line I would say
of science communication a lot of people
look to you you know for as a
spokesperson I would say we need more
spokespeople in science but what is our
our current epic right now and and why
is there this eroding trust in science
um and
you know what are your thoughts on on
how we can um
you know change the direction where
where science and Society are going
right now
so it's an important question I'm not
sure I can I don't I don't have a magic
formula I think um the magic formula is
persistence
um and resilience
um I think
um as you very well know we it's really
a a pandemic of of miscommunication
um LED unfortunately by social media
um which didn't exist in the before and
has now created a channel an equal
channel of misinformation I mean once
misinformation becomes uh
uh equivalent in terms of dispersal to
information you lost the battle already
um and that's the battery we're losing
every day there's no mechanism by which
you can identify one from the other
um and so it
that's an incredible battle
um so how do you win that I don't have
as I said I don't have a magic formula
you win the battle by persistence
resilience and sticking to what you know
and sticking to what you can do
um
I mean to some extent I think scientists
sewed their own
um gravestones or that's a mixed
metaphor but uh
um but nonetheless uh uh I think the the
uh there was a lapse in in judgment
um uh in many ways there was a over
promise and under delivery was one of
them
um uh the suspicion grew even more
deeply because
um we completely failed to communicate
that science is an uncertain
um topic that uncertainty is built into
science and often what I try to explain
to people is that there's a difference
between factual uncertainty and
methodological uncertainty it's a very
very important idea to convey uh factual
uncertainty is to say I don't know the
result I don't know the answer
methodological uncertainty is to say
our certainty is to say I don't know the
answer but I know how to get to the
answer
I know there's a as a method by which or
a standard or a set of proofs by which I
can get to the answer those are
different things science has a lot of
factual uncertainty many people in this
audience who are scientists when you ask
them a question will say I don't know
but if you ask them how would you know
um what would be the criteria of proof
um most people in this audience or
scientists would say that I I know the
answer to that question
um so what happened during the covet
pandemic is that people mixed up those
two things they mixed up what I would
call factual uncertainty which was
rampant because we didn't know you know
what was the direction of the movement
what kind of virus was this was this it
rosalized what was the effect of the
vaccine well decided those are factual
uncertainties
um they're also a different kind of
uncertainty which is a methodological
uncertainty what is the standard of
proof that is required to call something
effective or ineffective actually we
know that
we know that there are studies we know
what how those study what those studies
look like what are the what is the
nature of that study how is how that is
to be accomplished most scientists even
you know I would say a well-trained
first-year uh postdoctoral researcher
could tell you what are the standards of
proof that are required
um and one of the erosions that I've
seen is the confusion between those two
and so part of the way of climbing
ourselves out of this pit is to divide
those two things up and to say that in
fact the methodological things that and
the standard is of proof have actually
been around since the 17th century and
they haven't you know they didn't come
yesterday they didn't come you know
they've been advancing and moving along
but they're not Johnny come ladies the
factual uncertainties have also been
around since the 1700s and often we
don't know we don't know the answer but
we know how to get to the answer we know
the proofs so that would be one one
formula
um
maybe I can even just follow up on that
as the last question because I think you
know you um you do a an excellent job
describing that and the uncertainty of
science as part of Science and the
evolution of ideas and you have this for
you you made this uh metaphor of sand in
the eye and the other counterpart to
that you can probably remember it but it
was a really good idea I understand
I understand yeah it was an interesting
metaphor really for
um
um being what science is well like
trying to Grapple at the Leading Edge of
what we know and don't know
and maybe you could describe that uh
sure I mean in this book I describe two
kinds of problems in science uh which I
call sanding the eye versus eye in the
sand problem so sand and the eye
problems are problems in science where
you just have no clue about
directionality
um and everything uh has to be changed
the Paradigm shifts that are required so
at a certain point of time if just to
give you historical example a certain
point of time when physicists were
exploring the physical world
um they suddenly came up to ascending
the eye problem which is that uh they
push to a frontier of Newtonian physics
and began to see that you couldn't go
any further that there was no path
further in Newtonian physics because it
was it there was a blur
um like us Sandstorm
um and an entirely new paradigm had to
be the uncertainties were so deep and
the inconsistencies were so deep that
you had to create a new paradigm for for
scientific exploration so that happens
occasionally in science
um I would maybe argue that
um in the first phases of the code
pandemic we had a sand in the eye
problem it was a sandstorm of of
uncertainty
um
the eye and the sand problem is a very
different kind of problem in science uh
that is when you have a very consistent
set of
phenomena everything fits it's a jigsaw
puzzle that fits but there's one piece
that won't fit
um and that's an I understand problem it
irritates you like a piece of sand in
your eye and that is a kind of problem
where you have to either make the jigsaw
puzzle not fit and figure out that the
musical puzzle is wrong
um or you have to figure out whether the
piece is wrong
um and both of those could could be true
but um I think in the late phases of the
code pandemic and especially the phase
that we're now we are sort of an eye in
the sand problem which is questions like
uh questions like long covered
um is an eye in the scent problem which
is to say you know things make sense
but what the one thing that doesn't make
sense is why it is that some people and
particular people are having these
syndromes that we can't explain
um and there must be a methodological a
systematic way to explain them I'm just
giving you examples of books using setup
and happy
um but those are two broad distinctions
that I that I make in this book
um
well we covered a lot I'd like to at
least have like five six minutes of
questions and then there's a reception
and we can um
uh continue the conversation in in the
lobby but um there's also a badminton
game
and everyone's invited to the battery
exactly
some um
there's a question over there and
here and tell us who you are if you want
to do it's nice too no yes yeah and then
we may just take a couple quick
questions can you mentioned that you're
bipolar if I heard you correctly so how
do you
um in your perspective how do you feel
that contributes to your likeness of
being a writer and a scientist is do you
see that as separation of personalities
such as a perfect Confluence that
develops Who You Are
I hope I'm well controlled in medicines
um it's hard to know because uh uh but
um
uh you know your psychiatric
psychological State always contributes
to
um you're writing
um I think regardless of whether it's
whether you know you fall on the
spectrum of the ill or the spectrum of
the world but
um the answer is I mean obviously
um
as many people with uh manic
repressibilities Bible illness
um
can
um utilize enormous bursts of energy
um
and it becomes actually uh uh quite a
quite an engine if it if that engine
goes off the rails then you have the the
sad consequences of that but hopefully
you can get yourself to stay on the
rails
um but I I I I do ex I do have
extraordinary bursts of energy and I try
to use them
um
uh I recognize them when they happen
um and my whole family knows them there
are ways that I recognize them for
instance when I'm in when I'm tipping
over the edge I tend to repeat words so
I'll I'll start talking faster and I'll
say I I'll repeat repeat words
um and those are tip-offs
um
but I could also at that in those times
I can use I can pull
six all-nighters
um
in a row
and so they can be
I don't know I suppose useful in some
ways but uh
not particularly pleasant but useful in
some ways so but it leaves a Mark
um on on writing a course that called
forms of
mental States some of which tip into the
pathological some of which are actually
quite useful
um did we have a question over here yes
hi hello
um my name is galilez and I'm here um at
chanelia at the summer intern
um with an interest in cancer and
Immunology so my question is that you
mentioned as a fellow you got to see a
lot of like cancer patients throughout
your time so did any of them in
particular really touched you personally
and
um really made you think about your
passion and future in cancer research I
mean many of them I mean I would say all
of them touch me personally
um and influenced my writing there's uh
uh the end of the book has a particular
patience uh patient who
um
the problem is actually I only remember
their real names I don't remember the
names I gave them in the books
so I'm trying to think of what I called
her in the book but uh uh but anyway
um
uh but uh virtually all of them did and
um many of them are in this school Carla
uh Carla is one of them
um Jermaine and Jermaine is another one
they might actually know their real name
so that's why they I I forget what names
I gave them in the book because I had to
think of some name and I thought of the
names uh but nonetheless
um
uh so so many of them obviously have
influenced uh how I write and what I
write and they come up as characters in
other books as well uh in the subsequent
books as well so
um so absolutely you know virtually all
of them I have very very distinct
memories of
um and they often come up
um
as as characters in in other books in
subsequent books as well
okay uh this will be the last question
okay yes okay um good evening my name is
Emmanuel
um I'm also a summer intern here at
Genelia I just finished my freshman year
at College
um and my question is more so in regards
to your time management it's always
interesting to me how um such
influential people can manage so much uh
with the same amount of time that all
humans are given
um and I aspired to go along the MD PhD
track as well
um so I was wondering if you had like
any specific tips or advice that you
would give to to aspiring students like
me who really want to figure out the
best way to maximize the given time in
the day well unfortunately I don't have
great tips because I'm not I would say
that I'm you know of course I'm very
efficient in managing my time I I'm not
sure I have great tips about
time management that makes sense
so I can give you nonsensical ways of
managing your time but um I'm not sure
that particularly helpful because how do
you manage your time nonsensically so
um so I manage my time by
doing everything
um at the same time all at once
um and often many things very badly uh
this is not recommended for your summer
uh internship well that's why I said
don't go this is the advice you
shouldn't be listening to but
um I mean there are people who they're
different kinds of people in the world
the people who are very focused and can
accomplish focused tasks
um and they're also people who can do
you know multitask at the same obviously
at the same time definitionally
multitask
um so I do some kind of a kind of
chaotic I'm the I'm masterful that
chaotic multitasking
um uh so I will
in a given moment you know try to finish
a chapter of a book go to the laboratory
speak with a laboratory researcher for
10 minutes come back and do two phone
calls then you know manage another piece
of my variously collapsing forms of life
and
um and um and try to do fit everything
at the same time I have profoundly
terrible work-life balance
um leaning towards work
um but thankfully so does my wife so we
have two it's a foliage
a mutual Madness so
um that's how we manage our life and our
children
have sort of
um thankfully fallen into that same
thing uh so we are all I can say is that
your your your your Sunday sound uh
fantastic according to that article I'd
love to spend an entire Sunday day with
you and however you manage to do what
you do
uh I am in deep admiration and
um I think from this conversation I
think so is our audience so
um uh I will thanks it in one second I
do want to say that we have a few
Genelia ambassadors if you could please
stand up
um were you in the audience
oh okay well they have T-shirts that say
geniliana they're here to interact with
our guests from uh the community so you
can also find out a little bit more
about what is happening at Genelia so if
you see someone that Julia t-shirt
they're there to talk to you so please
come up to them
um and Sid this was an incredible
evening a memorable evening and
um we all thank you very much from our
heart absolutely thank you
thank you
foreign